SQL is a key data skill but where do you learn
it how do you learn it and what are the important
topics I know it's extremely intimidating
even thinking about what is the first step
especially because I came from a non-technical
background when I was first learning SQL but
sight now that I've been using SQL for many years
as a data professional I know the more efficient
and easier way to learn SQL and I will walk you
through the exact steps that I would take if I'm
learning SQL today first off let me get started
with what is SQL SQL stands for structured query
language and it allows you to interact with data
for example with this statement of Select * from
table where number is greater than five this
is just saying give me all the data from the
table where the numbers are greater than five
so it's very much like simple English and it's
something that I really believe you can pick
up without a computer science background now
why should you learn SQL can't AI do it yes AI can
code but SQL is still very much a required skill
set on many job listings including data analyst
data scientist data engineer project manager so
if you're interested in any of these job titles
SQL is a skill that you should start learning in
fact according to stack overflow survey from last
year SQL Remains the third most used programming
language across professional developers and
employers value not just your ability to use
SQL but your ability to use it to be able to draw
insights to make business decisions as Reddit user
mamertine best puts it I'm not paid because I can
write SQL I'm paid because I can understand data
employers are looking for you to not just use
SQL but your ability to critically think about
data and learning SQL will help you start doing
this now that we know SQL is fundamental how
would I learn it these are the three steps that
I would take step one choose an environment SQL
is used within a specific environment called
database management system dbms and each dbms
has its own flavor of SQL according to stack
Overflow survey where over 90,000 professional
developers responded they said that the three
most commonly used dbms's are postgresSQL mySQL
SQLlight and I'll make sure I include the links
to these descriptions below so that you can start
downloading them now what's the difference between
these three and which one should you choose on the
list well it really doesn't matter I would say
the syntax is very similar across all three and
they are all open source and free to download
so I wouldn't be too concerned about which one
to choose because you really can't go wrong but in
my experience I've used postgresSQL and Microsoft
SQL server and I really did not have any trouble
transitioning between them so I would just say
pick one and then move on to step two I'll also
mention that if you don't prefer to download any
software onto your laptop there are always cloud
databases as an option which are on AWS Google
cloud and Microsoft Azure they have limited free
options as well so check that out step two learn
the basics quickly in this step I am not going
to try to memorize all the syntax or learn all
of it as much as possible because there is
a lot of SQL syntaxes and nobody memorizes
them what I do want to focus on is learning the
fundamentals and by fundamentals I mean what is
a database what is a relational database what is
SQL and what is its uses then I want to focus on
the SQL syntax and structure this includes some
of the statements like earlier select from where
as well as the crud operations which stands for
create read update and delete and how am I going
to learn this well SQL is best learned by doing
and research shows that when you passively learn
you only retain about 20% of it whereas Active
Learning allows you to retain about 75% to 90%
of the information Interactive Learning is really
important when learning SQL and that's why I chose
DataCamp when I was first learning SQL because the
platform is very interactive and it allows you to
code directly within their platform DataCamp is
sponsoring this video and I'm so excited to tell
you about their SQL associate certification the
certification tests not only your SQL skills for
practice but also it includes a learning path so
that you can start learning the fundamentals and
get started with the guided courses of learning
to practice SQL hands-on the SQL associate
certification is a great way to prove your skills
and level up your SQL abilities and I'm really
excited to share that DataCamp is offering 25% off
using my link in the description so make sure you
take advantage of this offer and check it out now
on to step three learn SQL in context not syntax
the wrong way to learn SQL is by memorizing all
the syntax this this will only teach you how to
query the data but not actually understand it how
I would start learning SQL in context is to start
with a familiar small dataset like my credit card
statement with about 20 to 30 rows of data I'll
then analyze it and try to answer questions like
what is my spending habit and that will teach me
how to load data how to create a data table and
then be able to order my data set and start doing
a lot of what a data analyst would do and start
writing my own queries and as I do this these
are the topics I would progress from beginner to
advanced SQL so how much SQL should you know the
answer really depends on what your role is if
you're a project manager a beginner level SQL
is enough to be self-sufficient and be able to
do your own queries and gather your own data but
if you're looking for a more data heavy like a
data analyst or a data scientist but more junior
I would say a beginner to intermediate level
is enough and that is about the level that a
technical interview will be for SQL and then for
advanced SQL I would say that's really for more
senior level data roles as well as data Engineers
who are more heavy on the data infrastructure side
my tip for learning SQL goal is to continue
practicing it in context because this will
solidify your knowledge as well as give you the
confidence in your abilities there's a concept
called curve of forgetting which relates to the
idea of how we retain information on day one we
remember about 100% of what we learned but on day
30 we only remember about 2% to 3% however when
we expose ourselves to the same information
daily whether it be 10 minutes minutes even
2 to 4 minutes as time progresses we tend to get
closer to the 100% mark of what we retain and this
concept very much applies to learning SQL it's not
a skill that you can learn in a day but it is a
skill that as you practice you will get good at it
and you will retain it so have the confidence and
continue to practice your SQL skills if you found
this video helpful please like and subscribe to
the channel and watch my next video where I give
my honest advice about data analysts and I have
way more tips over there to get you started thank
you so much and I will see you on the next one